Sympathy and Telepathy: The Problem of Ethics in George Eliot's "The Lifted Veil"
Author(s): Thomas Albrecht
Source: ELH , Summer, 2006, Vol. 73, No. 2 (Summer, 2006), pp. 437-463
Published by: The Johns Hopkins University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/30030019
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/30030019?seq=1&cid=pdfreference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

The Johns Hopkins University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to ELH

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SYMPATHY AND TELEPATHY: THE PROBLEM OF
ETHICS IN GEORGE ELIOT'S THE LIFTED VEIL
BY THOMAS ALBRECHT

Presentiments are strange things! and so are sympathies; and so a
signs.

-Charlotte BrontW, Jane Eyre

I. SYMPATHY AND ANTIPATHY

If art does not enlarge men's sympathies, it does nothing morally.

-George Eliot, letter to Charles Bray

I have never been encouraged to trust much in the sympathy of my

fellow men.

-Latimer, in The Lifted Veil

Although George Eliot's gothic novella The Lifted Veil is not oste

sibly a work of realism, and although it has until recently been treate

by critics as a marginal anomaly in Eliot's oeuvre, its themes are
several respects central to Eliot's work overall and to Eliot's ethics
particular. By the time she composed the story early in 1859, El
had developed in her essays and in her first full-length novel Ad
Bede an ethics of art and aesthetics, specifically of realist art. T
ethics is founded on emotional responses, what Eliot calls sympat
and compassion, by which she means a person's ability to feel and
suffer with another person. Her theory insists that art should giv
reader or viewer access to the experiences, thoughts, and feelings

a great variety of different characters. Eliot proposes that our insigh

into the minds and experiences of these characters "extend" our sy

pathy for other people and for humanity in general, thereby producin

ELH 73 (2006) 437-463 c 2006 by The Johns Hopkins University Press 4

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

an ethical response in us. In her 1856 essay "The Natural History of
German Life," for example, she writes, "The greatest benefit we owe
to the artist, whether painter, poet, or novelist, is the extension of our
sympathies. ... Art is the nearest thing to life; it is a mode of amplifying experience and extending our contact with our fellow-men beyond

the bounds of our personal lot."' So whereas a critic like Walter Pater
describes the experience of art as a retraction into the self ("What is
this song or picture, this engaging personality presented in life or in a
book, to me?"), Eliot describes it as an extension beyond the limitations

of the self, as a coming up against some form of otherness.
Most recent scholars working on The Lifted Veil have noted in pass-

ing that the relation between art and ethics is implicitly taken up in
the novella; however, their analyses have largely sidestepped this issue

and concentrated instead on contextualizing elements from the plot
within such Victorian scientific theories and practices as mesmerism
and animal magnetism, phrenology, clairvoyance, vivisection, blood
transfusions, and physiological psychology.3 In this essay, I should like
to bring critical attention to the ethical dilemma that is implicitly and

explicitly raised in The Lifted Veil. I will focus in particular on the
central conceit of telepathic power and on its equivocal relation to
the moral value Eliot calls sympathy.
The Lifted Veil is told retrospectively in the form of a confessional

manuscript written by Latimer, an overly sensitive aesthete and misanthrope. As a young man, Latimer discovers that he is intermittently
and involuntarily subjected to two kinds of clairvoyant powers: he has
prescient visions of future events and telepathic access to the thoughts

and feelings of those around him. His insights into what he describes
as the pettiness, stupidity, and egotism of other people alienate him
from all society. He eventually meets Bertha Grant, a beautiful young
woman who soon after becomes engaged to marry his half-brother
Alfred. He falls in love with Bertha, in part because "she made the
only exception, among all the human beings about me, to my unhappy

gift of insight."4 He has a prescient vision of an older Bertha as his
wife, which reveals to him her cruelty and her hatred of him, but
he nevertheless continues to love and desire her. Following Alfred's
death in an accident, Latimer and Bertha are married and eventually
come to live together in the state of mutual alienation anticipated in
Latimer's vision. A visit from Latimer's childhood friend Meunier, now

a renowned scientist, is the occasion for a gothic reanimation scene
in which a recently deceased maid is momentarily restored to life to
accuse Bertha of plotting to poison Latimer. In this climactic scene,

438 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Bertha is revealed to Latimer as a femme fatale whose outer beauty
has veiled her inner monstrosity. After the couple's final separation
following this incident, the story ends with Latimer finishing his account and awaiting, in the narrative present, his own death predicted
at the novella's outset.5

Following a suggestive essay by Charles Swann, I propose that The
Lifted Veil implicitly tests the premises of Eliot's ethics of sympathy
through the conceit of Latimer's telepathic "participation in other

people's consciousness" (V, 17). Latimer's clairvoyance can be read
as an implicit figure for realist art as Eliot defines it, because it gives
Latimer access to the thoughts and feelings of a large number of
different people. Latimer is in this sense a stand-in for the reader or
viewer, and also, in another sense, a stand-in for Eliot herself and for

the artist in general. As Swann puts it, "Latimer knows the pains and
joys of others. . . . [His] position is strikingly analogous to that of the

reader of a George Eliot novel."6 Latimer himself characterizes his
telepathic powers as
the obtrusion in my mind of the mental process going forward in first

one person, then another, with whom I happened to be in contact:
the vagrant, frivolous ideas and emotions of some uninteresting
acquaintance .., .would force themselves on my consciousness like an
importunate, ill-played musical instrument, or the loud activity of an

imprisoned insect. (V, 13)

Latimer's reference to an obtrusion of frivolous emotions, and his
metaphors of the importunate instrument and the imprisoned insect,
suggest the potential failure of Eliot's ethical theory of art. This is

because while Latimer has access to the thoughts and feelings of
others, he does not respond according to Eliot's prescription; he feels
neither sympathy nor affection. Rather than eliciting pity and compassion, Latimer's telepathic insights elicit in him only boredom and
contempt. To have involuntary access to the minds of his neighbors,
he complains, is at best "wearying and annoying," at worst "an intense

pain and grief" (V, 13-14). Thus Latimer's experiences would seem to
contradict Eliot's theory that art can and should enlarge our sympathy

simply by granting us access to the thoughts and feelings of those
around us. Latimer in fact makes explicit reference to this theory, but
only to dismiss it as a wishful illusion:
This is one of the vain thoughts with which we men flatter ourselves.
We try to believe that the egotism within us would have easily been

Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

439

melted, and that it was only the narrowness of our knowledge which
hemmed in our generosity, our awe, our human pity, and hindered
them from submerging our hard indifference to the sensations and
emotions of our fellow. (V, 21-22)

Latimer briefly considers the possibility that an expansion of our insight into others might lead us to feel pity and generosity for them.
But his final assessment is that this is only "one of the vain thoughts

with which we men flatter ourselves."7

Through Latimer's "hard indifference" to the sensations and emotions of the people around him, The Lifted Veil dramatizes a crisis for

Eliot's ethics of sympathy. Latimer's misanthropic responses to other
people suggest a less stable relation between art and ethics than the
one necessitated by Eliot's theory. Eliot herself alludes to this more
unstable relation in a line she wrote to her friend Charles Bray at
the time of the novella's composition, "If art does not enlarge men's
sympathies, it does nothing morally."" There are at least two ways to
read this sentence, and the ambiguity nicely condenses the ethical
predicament in The Lifted Veil. On the one hand, Eliot maintains that
art can be morally effective by enlarging our sympathies. On the other
hand, her use of the double negative suggests that art is morally inef-

ficient because it does not enlarge our sympathy, a more pessimistic
assessment which Latimer's experiences would seem to confirm.9 I
propose that Eliot both acknowledges and resolves this predicament
at the level of the plot. In order to defend her ethical theory against
the implications of Latimer's narcissism, she stages a conversion narrative in which Latimer makes an unexpected transition from antipathy to sympathy. She then projects Latimer's antipathy onto another
character, namely Bertha Grant, the femme fatale of her story. This
projection allows her to delineate and to demonize the antipathy more
distinctively (using the convenient figure of a transgressive woman),
and then, at a symbolic level, to expel it.
The initial step in the expulsion of Bertha and of the antipathy she

represents is the moral conversion Latimer undergoes on the evening
of his father's death. The father's dying from an illness becomes the first

occasion for Latimer to feel sympathy for another human being:
Perhaps it was the first day since the beginning of my passion for
[Bertha], in which that passion was completely neutralised by the
presence of an absorbing feeling of another kind. I had been watching
by my father's deathbed: I had been witnessing the last fitful yearning
glance his soul had cast back on the spent inheritance of life-the last

440 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

faint consciousness of love he had gathered from the pressure of my
hand. What are all our personal loves when we have been sharing in
that supreme agony? In the first moments when we come away from
the presence of death, every other relation to the living is merged, to

our feeling, in the great relation of a common nature and a common
destiny. (V, 31, my emphasis)

This passage depicts unprecedented avowals of sympathy and compassion. For the first time in the novella, Latimer does not respond to
the consciousness of another person with contempt or indifference.
Instead, he claims a connection with his father by way of their shared

mortality. The word sympathy derives from the Greek sympathes
(having common feelings) and is here evoked in Latimer's emphasis
on commonality ("the great relation of a common nature and a common destiny"). Through his communion with his father and through
the sense of their common mortality, Latimer is also able to claim a
connection with humanity in general, as indicated by his shift in the
passage from the first person singular to the first person plural.1o
Latimer's conversion to sympathy at his father's death leads directly
to his first clairvoyant insight into Bertha's mind. Up until this point

in the narrative, Bertha has remained a "fascinating secret" (V, 20)
and an "oasis of mystery" (V, 18) to him, and for this reason an object

of intense speculations and desires. But immediately following his
communion with his dying father, Latimer experiences a "terrible moment of complete illumination," which directly reveals to him Bertha's

"scheming selfishness" and her "repulsion and antipathy harden[ing]
into cruel hatred" (V, 32). He explicitly depicts this illumination as an
effect of the bond he has just shared with his father:
In that state of mind I joined Bertha in her private sitting-room...
I remember, as I closed the door behind me, a cold tremulousness

seizing me, and a vague sense of being hated and lonely-vague and
strong, like a presentiment. I know how I looked at that moment, for

I saw myself in Bertha's thought as she lifted her cutting grey eyes,
and looked at me: a miserable ghost-seer, surrounded by phantoms

in the noon-day, trembling under a breeze when the leaves were
still, without appetites for the common objects of human desire, but
pining after the moonbeams. We were front to front with each other,
and judged each other. The terrible moment of complete illumination

had come. (V, 31-32)

Among other things, this scene is explicitly a moment of judgment
("We ... judged each other"), a moment of moral recognition. I would
Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

441

argue that in the exchange of looks between the two characters, the
specific function of Bertha's gaze is to appropriate Latimer's earlier
antipathy. What Latimer sees and recognizes is not so much Bertha's
inner self, but rather the way in which she sees him: "I saw myself
in Bertha's thought as she lifted her cutting grey eyes, and looked at
me: a miserable ghost-seer, surrounded by phantoms in the noon-day,
trembling under a breeze when the leaves were still, without appetite
for the common objects of human desire." The way in which Bertha
sees Latimer closely resembles the way in which he had earlier seen
the people around him: as miserable, pitiful, and as fundamentally
disconnected from one another. At the same time, her gaze stands in
explicit contrast to Latimer's clairvoyant communion with his dying
father in the scene just before, thus suggesting that Eliot has projected

the antipathy away from Latimer and onto Bertha. The misanthropic
Bertha, it seems, is unveiled here by Latimer as his own uncanny
double."

Eliot's purpose in exposing Bertha as Latimer's double is to protect
her ethics of sympathy from the implications of Latimer's antipathy.
By projecting that antipathy onto Bertha, Eliot leaves Latimer, the
proxy for both herself and the reader, free to convert to sympathy. The
subsequent redemption of Latimer in the plot signals the concurrent
redemption of Eliot's literary ethics and the successful warding off of an

implicit threat. The protective effect of the projection lies in Bertha's

more unequivocal embodiment of antipathy. While Latimer's misanthropy is exonerated in the plot by the oedipal and social pressures to
which he is continually subjected, and while it is ultimately (though
only partially) transformed into sympathy for the dying father and for
humanity in general, Bertha is an image of antipathy as pure, absolute
evil. Eliot uses the conventions of the nineteenth-centuryfemmefatale

to make this evil intelligible, suggesting a direct correspondence between Bertha's character and her sex, an association readily available
in Victorian culture.'" The femme fatale provides Eliot with a stock
personification of antipathy, an antipathy that is unveiled and then
symbolically expelled, much as the character Bertha is expelled from
the plot once her secret plan to poison Latimer has been unveiled.

442 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

II. SYMPATHY AND METAPHOR

All of us, grave or light, get our thoughts entangled in metaphors an
act fatally on the strength of them.

-Middlemarch, chapter 10

The structure outlined at the end of the previous section is w
Neil Hertz has identified as "a structure common in Eliot's novels

double surrogation, in which the author's investment in her characte

is split into 'good' and 'bad' versions, and the valued imaginative activ

of the 'good' surrogate is purchased by the exiling of the 'bad.""'1
The Lifted Veil, Latimer transforms into Eliot's good surrogate, w
Bertha is the bad surrogate. In his reading of Middlemarch, He
considers the overall structure, and the overcoming of the thr
posed by the bad surrogate, a protective displacement of a diffe
threat, one which Eliot cannot overcome as easily. He identifies
second threat as an "open and indeterminate self-dispersion ass

ated with a plurality of signs and the plurality of interpretations th

writing can provoke."14 For Hertz, the danger displaced by the m
conflict in Middlemarch between good and bad authorial surroga
is a categorical threat to the self as such, to its ability to conceiv
itself as a unified and coherent entity. My reading of The Lifted
follows Hertz in identifying an opposition between a good and a
surrogate for Eliot and in suggesting that the entire double surr
tion structure is a displacement of a different threat altogether.
unlike Hertz, I identify the latter not as an extra-moral threat to

self's ability to constitute itself, but as another moral threat. I will b

arguing that this second threat is ethically more troubling to

than either Latimer's egotism or Bertha's evil. I specifically locate th

threat not in any one character's disposition towards another charact

but in the visual metaphors through which Latimer's moral insig

are formulated. Insofar as these insights take the form of metaphor

they are based on principles of similarity, analogy, and commona
Such principles are fundamentally at odds with Eliot's notion of w

a true ethics should be, namely an attentiveness to what is irreducibl

different or apart from oneself. Ultimately the more disturbing eth
conflict in The Lifted Veil is not between antipathy and sympathy b

between an ethics based on similarity and one based on differenc
As its title suggests, The Lifted Veil has an interest in the co
monplace Victorian theme of knowledge and, more specifically, in
Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

443

play between knowledge and ignorance, veiling and unveiling, secrecy
and initiation. The privileged object of knowledge for Eliot's novels
in general and for The Lifted Veil in particular is the consciousness
of other people. In The Lifted Veil, the theme of Latimer's telepathy
demonstrates the novella's preoccupation with the idea of gaining access to someone else's mind. For Eliot, the appreciation of another
person's consciousness that is made possible by art is the first step
towards moral agency, which is for her the aim of all great art and
criticism. Thus any understanding one may gain of another person's
thoughts and feelings is never a neutral kind of knowledge but always
has a strong moral dimension; in The Lifted Veil, for instance, Latimer's
sympathetic witnessing of his dying father's thoughts, and the revelation

to him of Bertha's antipathy, are distinctly moral insights.
As its title also suggests, The Lifted Veil portrays the initiation into

moral knowledge in specifically visual terms. Here, for example, is
Latimer's experience of his grieving father's consciousness: "As I saw
into the desolation of my father's heart, I felt a movement of deep
pity towards him, which was the beginning of a new affection" (V, 28,

my emphasis). And here is Latimer's telepathic insight into Bertha's
mind, partially quoted earlier: "I saw myself in Bertha's thought as
she lifted her cutting grey eyes, and looked at me: a miserable ghostseer... The terrible moment of complete illumination had come to
me, and I saw the darkness had hidden no landscape from me, but
only a blank prosaic wall" (V, 32, my emphasis). Latimer's conversion to sympathy and the revelation of Bertha's antipathy are both
represented visually: Latimer sees into his father's desolate heart, he
sees into Bertha's mind, and he sees himself in Bertha's eyes. Both
moments demonstrate the extent to which Eliot frames morality and
immorality in visual terms and the extent to which she makes moral
conclusions intelligible through visual metaphors such as clairvoyance,
darkness, and illumination. These kinds of metaphors traditionally imply

an epistemological reliability and would thus serve to strengthen the
authority of Latimer's insights.

The "blank prosaic wall" as which Bertha is revealed to Latimer in
the second quotation indicates a second metaphorical strand in The
Lifted Veil that is intertwined with the visual metaphors (clairvoyance,

illumination, darkness, and so on), namely a series of metaphorical
references to prose, that is to writing, reading, texts, and to language.

Rather than comparing Bertha to a visual object, the latter metaphors
compare her to a text that must be deciphered or read. Latimer compares Bertha to an epigram (V, 26), her glances to "feminine nothings

444 S1ympathq and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

which could never be quoted against her" (V, 16), and his recollections
of her to "an oriental alphabet" (V, 35). Like the visual metaphors,
these metaphors concentrate around Bertha in scenes of considerable
epistemological stress. But unlike the visual metaphors, they designate
her inaccessibility, rather than her accessibility, to Latimer's clairvoyant

powers: "Bertha's inward self remained shrouded from me, and I still
read her thoughts only through the language of her lips and demeanour" (V, 31). In this line, Latimer associates vision with certainty, and
reading with uncertainty and tentativeness.
Several of the examples I have cited join together the two metaphori-

cal strands in which Bertha is entwined: the visual metaphors (which
compare her to a visual object) and the textual metaphors (which
compare her to a piece of writing). For instance, the "blank prosaic
wall" simultaneously compares her to a wall and to a piece of prose.
Yet even as the two metaphorical strands sometimes overlap, they each
designate their referent, Bertha, in very distinct terms: the one in terms

of the senses ("seeing" her) and the other in textual terms ("reading"
her). Reading and seeing are of course not wholly analogous, and in
fact the two strands sometimes come to interfere with one another,
and to comment on one another. As J. Hillis Miller has noted about the
relation between different metaphorical strands in Middlemarch, "the

interpretation of one metaphor by another metaphor is characteristic
of Eliot's use of figure."'5 In The Lifted Veil, I would propose, the
textual metaphors interpret the visual metaphors as mere metaphors.
In doing so, they subvert the visual metaphors' privileged status as
decisive revelations. This is because simply by their juxtaposition with
the visual metaphors, the textual metaphors foreground, as it were, the
metaphorical nature of the visual metaphors. The combination of the
two strands, for instance in the "blank prosaic wall," emphasizes that
the "illumination" and "unveiling" of Bertha's inner self are also only
metaphors, just as the comparisons of Bertha to an oriental alphabet
or an epigram are metaphors. However, because the unveiling and
the illumination evoke the sensual experience of seeing an object with
one's eyes (rather than the experience of reading a text), they veil their
own metaphorical nature in a way that the textual metaphors arguably
do not. By veiling their status as figures, the visual metaphors imply
a revelation by means of the senses; this revelation would be decisive
and absolute insofar as it would not be mediated by means of language
and tropological figures, that is, by means of reading and writing. The
claim to a sensory rather than linguistic access to truth underwrites
the moral conclusions of the novella; I have shown this in my reading
Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

445

of moral truths becoming visually intelligible in Latimer's visions of
his father's desolate soul and Bertha's misanthropic consciousness. My
claim now is that through the juxtaposition of Latimer's visual revela-

tions with the textual metaphors, Eliot brings out the metaphorical
nature of those revelations. That metaphorical nature in turn implies
the revelations' potential arbitrariness and unreliability.
The comparisons of Bertha to a piece of writing suggest that rather
than being an object Latimer can see, Bertha is a kind of impenetrable
text that has to be read or deciphered. The metaphor of a text designates
the otherness of Bertha from Latimer; Eliot makes this explicit insofar

as she repeatedly associates versions of this figure with opacity, as in
the image of the oriental alphabet. If the other is a kind of obscure
text, Eliot suggests, it is open to something like numerous, potentially
contradictory interpretations, but not to something like clear, unequivocal vision. As only one possible interpretation (out of many) of the text

as which Bertha becomes manifest, then, Latimer's visual exposure of

the character Bertha is not an absolute revelation of truth. It is rather

the revelation of a truth that is more arbitrary and subjective, one that

potentially says more about Latimer than about Bertha. Hence even
at the moment of her alleged unveiling, Bertha "remain[s] virtually
unknown" to Latimer and to us; she is "known merely as a cluster of
signs for [her] neighbour's false suppositions."'16 Latimer's recognition

of her inner selfishness is only one supposition made on the basis of
the cluster of signs as which Bertha is intelligible to him. His insight
into her consciousness, and by extension any insight into it, is only
one interpretation of "the language of her lips and demeanour," of
that obscure language which (figuratively) indicates her difference
from him and from us.

To some extent, the possibility that Latimer is interpreting Bertha,
rather than directly seeing into her, is covered over, so to speak, by the
veil of the visual metaphor, by the veil of Bertha's visual unveiling. Eliot

covers it over because she wants to protect the authority of Latimer's
moral insights; once we realize that those insights are only metaphors
and interpretations, their authority would be compromised due to the
potential arbitrariness of metaphors and interpretations, which Eliot
famously acknowledges throughout her writings. At the same time
that she protects Latimer's insights, however, Eliot uses the textual
metaphors implicitly to undermine their authority, by showing that
Bertha is truly Latimer's other, and that his insights into her are only
his own approximations of that otherness via metaphor. Figuratively
speaking, those insights are like interpretations of a text and thus sub-

446 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ject to the same kind of uncertainty and capriciousness to which any
interpretation is subject."7 If Bertha in her otherness is more like a text
than like a visual object, Eliot implies, Latimer cannot literally see into

her. She cannot literally be unveiled, only metaphorically. Thus Eliot
calls the epistemological authority of Latimer's visions into question.
In the concluding section of this essay, I will consider how she calls
the moral authority of those visions into question as well.
As a first step in that direction, I should like to offer an example
of how Latimer's use of figurative language destabilizes the moral
insights made possible by Bertha's visual unveiling. In the climactic
scene of The Lifted Veil, Bertha's recently deceased maid, Mrs. Archer, is temporarily brought back to life to reveal Bertha's secret plot

to poison Latimer:
The dead woman's eyes were wide open, and met [Bertha's eyes] in full
recognition-the recognition of hate. With a sudden strong effort, the
hand that Bertha had thought for ever still was pointed towards her, and

the haggard face moved. The gasping eager voice said-"You mean to
poison your husband." (V, 41-42)

Like Latimer's insights into the consciousnesses of his father and
Bertha, Mrs. Archer's exposure of Bertha is pointedly visual; it takes
the form of her eyes meeting Bertha's eyes. The scene is crucial to
the plot because it provides empirical evidence for Bertha's exposure
and indictment, adding to Latimer's earlier clairvoyant evidence.
And it is also crucial to the double surrogation structure because it
provides empirical evidence for the indictment of Bertha as Eliot's
bad surrogate. In the passage, the good surrogate, Latimer, explicitly
equates Mrs. Archer's "full recognition" of Bertha with "the recognition of hate," the kind of hate of which Eliot wishes to purge him by
projecting it onto Bertha.
Yet the moral authority of Bertha's exposure ("we all felt that the
dark veil had completely fallen") is undermined by a suggestion that the

evidence in question is as much metaphorical as empirical.'8 Bertha's
plan to poison Latimer is not only a secret plot unveiled by Mrs. Archer
but also a citation of one of Latimer's recurring metaphors for Bertha,
the figure of Lucrezia Borgia. Earlier in the story, Latimer and Bertha
are in Vienna, visiting a picture gallery:
I had been looking at Giorgione's picture of the cruel-eyed woman,
said to be a likeness of Lucrezia Borgia. I had stood long alone before
it, fascinated by the terrible reality of that cunning, relentless face, till

Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

447

I felt a strange poisoned sensation, as if I had long been inhaling a fatal
odour, and was just beginning to be conscious of its effects. (V, 18-19,
my emphasis)

Latimer's choice of the word "poisoned" to describe the strange sensation

he feels while looking at the portrait would seem to be motivated by
the subject matter of the painting itself. At the same time, the epithet
"cruel-eyed" indicates an affinity between the woman in the portrait and
Bertha, an affinity that is confirmed in a scene immediately following.

As Bertha takes Latimer's arm, he relates that "a strange intoxicating
numbness passed over me, like the continuance or climax of the sensa-

tion I was still feeling from the gaze of Lucrezia Borgia" (V, 19). The
doubling of Bertha and Lucrezia Borgia raises the possibility that the
poisoning plot that is later revealed by Mrs. Archer is merely Latimer's

taking his metaphor for Bertha to its logical conclusion. If Bertha is
(like) Lucrezia Borgia, it follows that she would attempt to eliminate
her enemy by poison. The literal poison intended for Latimer is in this

sense just a variant of the "poisoned sensation" Latimer claims to feel
in the presence of the Lucrezia Borgia portrait.'9

The poison metaphor appears elsewhere in the novella as well. Latimer refers to the scene just described as "that hideous vision which
poisoned the passion it could not destroy" (V, 21), and he justifies his
ongoing infatuation with Bertha by claiming, "The fear of poison is feeble

against the sense of thirst" (V, 20). Given this recurring and somewhat
banal metaphor, one has to be just a little suspicious when Bertha's plan
to poison Latimer is finally revealed. At best, Mrs. Archer's exposure of
Bertha's plan leaves us unable to choose between taking this moment as
a revelation of an empirical truth and taking it as one more recurrence of
the Lucrezia Borgia metaphor. The status of the revelation is ultimately
undecidable because Eliot provides us with no means by which to know
for sure. Certainly the unveiling of Bertha's secret plot is crucial to the
novella's resolution, but its truth is not empirically (that is to say, nonmetaphorically) verifiable. This is not because Latimer may be an unreli-

able narrator, as Terry Eagleton has argued, but because the poisoning
plot is at the same time simply a quotation of a metaphor taken from a
series of metaphors that leads back to the woman in the portrait, "said
to be a likeness of Lucrezia Borgia" (V, 18-19, my emphasis)."20
Caught in this predicament, we should not try to verify whether the
scene is "really" a moment of truth or "just" a citation of a metaphor.

Eliot's point is that it is both at once, insofar as she does not make a
tenable distinction here between a true insight into the other and a meta-

448 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

phor for the other. This is the epistemological predicament personified
by the figure of Bertha. The many textual metaphors for Bertha insist
that any revelation of Bertha's inner self, including this one, is already a
metaphor, whether that metaphor is drawn from the sensual realm or the

linguistic realm or from elsewhere. To put it another way, the unveiling
of Bertha's character is one interpretation (among many possible interpretations) of the text as which Bertha is intelligible to Latimer and to
us. This general point about the constitutive relation between the other
and metaphor is merely reconfirmed here by the uncanny coincidence of
a frequently recurring metaphor and an alleged revelation of the other's
interiority or essence.
Eliot's recognition of metaphor's constitutive role in our insights into

other people has fundamental consequences for her understanding of
morality, as she acknowledges in a comment made by her good surrogate,

Latimer. At a point late in the narrative, Latimer explicitly interrogates
the validity of any moral judgment of another person that is mediated

through one's own verbal representation of that person's experience.
He concludes an assessment of his and Bertha's unhappy marriage by
questioning the moral authority of such assessments:
That course of our life which I have indicated in a few sentences filled

the space of years. So much misery-so slow and hideous a growth of
hatred and sin, may be compressed into a sentence! And men judge of
each other's lives through this summary medium. They epitomise the
experience of their fellow-mortal, and pronounce judgment on him in
neat syntax, and feel themselves wise and virtuous-conquerors over the
temptations they define in well-selected predicates. (V, 34)

Latimer insists here on a distinction between years of misery and the
compression of those years into a single sentence, between actual
experience and the epitome of that experience (an epitome is a brief
verbal summary). What men judge when they judge one another, he
says, is never the other's actual experience, but always its epitome.
These kinds of judgments, he points out, allow the judges to "feel
themselves wise and virtuous-conquerors over the temptations they
define in well-selected predicates." At the same time, he calls this kind
of morality into question because it is built on one's own definition of

the other's temptations and on one's own summations of the other's
experience, rather than on an appreciation of the other's experience
itself, of that experience in its otherness.

Latimer's reflections on the ways our judgments of one another
are verbally mediated substantiate my earlier claim that Eliot's episThomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

449

temological emphasis on the metaphorical bases of moral insights into
other people puts not only the reliability but the morality of those
insights into question. The epistemological problem is that metaphors
are arbitrary and subjective, which in turn subjects one's insights to
a potential arbitrariness. The moral problem is that these metaphors
are always one's own figures for the other; as such, they refer back to

oneself, not to the other. Metaphors are based on principles of analogy and similarity, not difference. They establish a relation between
the other and something that is already familiar to oneself in order
to make the other more familiar. In the Rhetoric, Aristotle identifies
familiarization as both the means and the aim of metaphors: "[I]n using

metaphors to give names to nameless things, we must draw them not
from remote but from kindred and similar things, so that the kinship

is clearly perceived as soon as the words are said."21 The kinship to be
perceived is not only between the metaphor and the nameless thing
but also between us and the thing. The ethical problem here is the
implicit emphasis on the other's kinship to oneself. Latimer suggests
in the passage quoted above that a more just ethics would be an appreciation of the other as other: an appreciation of the other's actual
experience, not an appreciation of one's definition of that experience.
His claim complements explicit claims Eliot makes throughout her
writings. In her essay "The Natural History of German Life," for
instance, she argues that great art "surprises even the trivial and the
selfish into that attention to what is apart from themselves, which may
be called the raw material of moral sentiment.""22 Elsewhere, in a letter

to Bray from which I have quoted earlier, she writes, "[T]he only effect I ardently long to produce by my writings is that those who read

them should be better able to imagine and to feel the pains and joys
of those who differ from themselves" (L, 3:111). And in Middlemarch,
her narrator specifically indicts the egotistic Rosamond for her inability
or unwillingness to engage with Lydgate as someone autonomous from

herself: "Rosamond, in fact, was entirely occupied not exactly with
Tertius Lydgate as he was in himself, but with his relation to her."23
So Eliot explicitly defines the ethics of art and of interpersonal relations as an attention to what is apart or different from oneself. This
appeal to our awareness of the other's difference from us, rather than
its similarity to us, has been largely overlooked by critics working on

Eliot's ethics, critics who primarily define those ethics in terms of a
fellowship or sympathy between the self and the other.24 Eliot derives
the imperative to acknowledge the other's otherness from the work of

Ludwig Feuerbach, a writer with whom she claimed a great affinity

450 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(L, 2:153), and especially from Feuerbach's Essence of Christianity,
a text she translated in 1854. "The consciousness of the moral law,
of right, of propriety, of truth itself," Feuerbach writes in Marian
Evans's translation, "is indissolubly connected with my consciousness
of another than myself."25

Eliot's appeal to a consciousness of the other's difference from
ourselves would seem to be at odds with her own attention to Bertha,
which pointedly does not acknowledge Bertha's otherness, even though

Bertha is, by virtue of her gender (she is the only significant female
character in the story) and by virtue of her opacity, the novella's exem-

plar of otherness. Eliot ultimately reveals Bertha as a deficient double
of Latimer and, by implicit extension, of herself, not as something truly

apart from Latimer or herself. Like Rosamond in the citation from
Midlemarch, Eliot is preoccupied not with Bertha as she is, but with
Bertha's relation to herself. This preoccupation with Bertha as her own
bad double ultimately allows her to resolve her ethical dilemma and to
close the narrative, but the ethics of that closure are called into question by her simultaneous insistence that the other must be attended
to as other, not as a (negative or positive) reflection of the self. In the
final section of this essay, I will argue that this discrepancy between
an ethics based on true difference and an ethics based on similarity
points to an ethical dilemma in The Lifted Veil that is itself radically
different from the sympathy/antipathy problem on which the novella
and Eliot's work in general ostensibly concentrate. The latter problem,
I will propose, is a protective displacement of the former.
III. SYMPATHY AND TELEPATHY

The moral is plain enough... the one-sided knowing of

relation to the self.

-George Henry Lewes, on The Lifted V

In The Lifted Veil, the truly ethical attention to the othe
from oneself" would seem to be exemplified by the conceit

telepathy. Etymologically, the word telepathy implies distan

apartness; literally, it means to feel something from a distan
is usually defined as extrasensory impressions of something

far away and separate from oneself. Thus it designates an ap

of the other from a distance, a relation to the other that is

unmediated by one's senses or language. In accordance wi
Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

451

junction to respect the difference between oneself and the other, it would
seem to be a figure for a purely ethical relation. It is a figure for gaining

access to the actual person rather than to an epitome of the person. Yet
Eliot is tellingly unable to represent Latimer's telepathy except through
sensory metaphors like "microscopic vision" (V, 14) and "a preternaturally heightened sense of hearing" (V, 18). These metaphors indicate
the extent to which Eliot is forced to represent the radical alterity of
telepathic experience in familiar analogues. Something that is presumably
extrasensory is rendered by her in images of heightened sensory experiences. Telepathy, it would seem, can only be represented metaphorically,
which is to say it cannot be represented as such; thus the representation
of telepathy as heightened senses paradoxically points to the impossibility of representing telepathy. Along a similar vein, Eliot represents the
thoughts and feelings of other people to which Latimer gains clairvoyant
access not as any kind of irreducible otherness but in familiar (though
admittedly opaque) similes like "a ringing in the ears not to be gotten rid
of" (V, 18), "a sensation of grating metal" (V, 14), an "ill-played musical
instrument" (V, 13), "the loud activity of an imprisoned insect" (V, 13),
and "a roar of sound where others find perfect stillness" (V, 18). These
metaphors for the otherness of other people's consciousnesses ostensibly
designate the epistemological problem outlined in the previous section:
the recognition that the other necessarily becomes intelligible through
one's own metaphors for it.26 For Eliot, this epistemological problem
has profound and explicit ethical repercussions.
I would maintain that the novella's failure to represent Latimer's
telepathy is indicative of its true ethical dilemma: the inability to face
the other as other, despite Eliot's injunction that we must do precisely
that, and the inevitable recourse to framing the other in terms of oneself. This recourse to one's own terms is a recourse to metaphor, to a
framing of the relation to the other as a similarity, not as irreducibly
differential. Eliot's failure to write telepathically about telepathy suggests that the kinds of verbal summations and judgments we make of
each other's experiences are inevitable because the person doing the
judging could never have access to the other's experiences as such,
could never, that is, have telepathic access to the other. Through this
failure, Eliot insists that as soon as one enters into a relationship with
the other, a relation of ethically judging, say, this relationship is never
telepathic but always mediated through one's own metaphors and interpretations. This is the argument of the narrator in Middlemarch, who
states that people remain "virtually unknown" to one another, and can
be known only as clusters of signs for their neighbor's false suppositions.

452 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Latimer, for instance, comes to know Bertha through such signs and
sign clusters as the blank prosaic wall, the cold gaze, the secret plot
to poison him, and so on, but he does not know her telepathically, as
someone completely and irreducibly apart from himself. So despite
the novella's title, Bertha's veil is never truly lifted at all.27

Through her failure to represent Latimer's telepathy as such, Eliot suggests that an ethics based on difference may be impossible to
formalize. In attempting to attain a moral position, her only recourse
is sympathy, an ethics based on commonality, on what she calls the
fellowship of all human beings.2s The word sympathy, derived from
the Greek syn (with, together with) and pathos (feeling), would seem
to be opposed to telepathy, a word derived from tele (distant) and
pathos. The difference is between understanding and relating to the
other in terms of its similarity to oneself, and understanding it in terms

of its irreducible distance from oneself. In The Lifted Veil, Eliot can
only understand or represent the other in terms of similarity, which
is to say in terms of metaphors (the ill-played musical instrument,
the imprisoned insect, the narrow room, and so on). The other is not
known as "apart from oneself," even though the conceit of telepathy
is a reminder of the (failed) imperative to know it in just such a way.
The other is known only in terms of an analogy to the self, in terms
of what Latimer at his father's deathbed calls "the great relation of
a common nature and a common destiny" (V, 31). Latimer's implicit
interpretation of his father's mortality as a figure for his own is indicative

of this ethics of sympathy. It is indicative of the necessary recourse to
metaphor (for Latimer, the dying father is fundamentally a metaphor

for himself). Latimer's conversion to sympathy is in this sense also a
figure for the failure of telepathy, for the impossibility of facing the
other as other.29
Eliot's turn from telepathy to sympathy is not only an epistemologi-

cal necessity but a compensatory move aimed at restoring for Eliot
the possibility of any ethical agency at all.30 To put it in the terms
of Freud's essay "Fetishism," it is an apotropaic belief in similarity
(here, the fellowship between oneself and the other) that indicates
and simultaneously covers over an awareness of difference (here, the
other's difference from oneself, and the difference between an ethics
based on difference and an ethics based on similarity). Sympathy is
a kind of fetish, and, like the Freudian fetish, it designates both the
presence and the absence of something deemed valuable (in Eliot's
case not the maternal phallus but an ethical relation to the other). It
enables Eliot and her reader to be moral agents, but it also subverts
Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

453

that morality through its uncanny similarity, at a fundamental level,
to antipathy, its alleged opposite.
Insofar as sympathy is based on a presumed similarity between the
other and oneself, it effectively collapses the distinction between itself
and egotism. That distinction is the fundamental opposition within
which critics have traditionally located the defining ethical conflict in
Eliot's work. The distinction collapses, Eliot implies in The Lifted Veil,
because both sympathy and egotism similarly relate the other back to
the self, either in terms of its similarity or dissimilarity to the self. In
the end, the two kinds of relationships come back to the same thing,
namely the self, and neither meets Eliot's ethical criterion of being
attentive to what is "apart from oneself" (in other words neither is
telepathic). This is true no matter how good or bad one's intentions,

or how compassionate or misanthropic one's language. Both positions are fundamentally metaphorical, since any relationship to the
other, whether friendly or hostile, is based on a (positive or negative)
comparison of the other to oneself. This implicit comparison is what
such diverse metaphors as the blank prosaic wall, the great relation
of a common destiny, and the ill-played musical instrument have in
common. Eliot's failure to represent the radical alterity of Latimer's
telepathy suggests that this recourse to metaphor is inevitable; it implies that we can only ever face the other as some kind of metaphor.
Eliot uses the figure of obscure writing to designate her awareness of
Bertha's irreducible otherness, but it too is just a metaphor.
If the recourse to sympathy and thus to metaphor is epistemologically
unavoidable, however, Eliot also indicts it as ethically deficient. Sympathy is in one crucial respect not a fully ethical position for her because
it does not attend to the other as such, but is rather, in George Henry
Lewes's words, a "one-sided knowing of things in relation to the self."31

It is a unilateral relation, not only insofar as it relates the other back
to the self via the assumption of a fellowship, but in that it empowers
and inflates the self by means of this relation. In The Lifted Veil, Eliot
suggests that there is a kind of narcissism implicit in sympathy, since
sympathy, not unlike antipathy, ultimately refers the other back to the

self in order to confirm and nourish the self. As Latimer puts this in

a phrase cited earlier, the assumption of a sympathetic bond between
ourselves and our neighbors "is one of the vain thoughts with which
we men flatter ourselves." His critique of sympathy here is twofold. On
the one hand, he argues that sympathy is simply impossible, due to our
"hard indifference to the sensations and emotions of our fellow." This
is his by now familiar misanthropic critique of sympathy, against which

454 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

a defense of sympathy could meaningfully be opposed. On the other
hand, and much more problematically, he states that sympathy and the
very idea of sympathy are essentially narcissistic. According to this latter critique, we are not indifferent to the other at all but use the other
(and our relation to the other) as a means of flattering ourselves.32 In
this sense of an underlying narcissism, Latimer's "good" sympathy for
his father is not fundamentally distinct from his "bad" condemnations
of his neighbors' pettiness and stupidity. Neither is Latimer's antipathy
fundamentally distinct from his ostensibly moral recognition of Bertha's

selfishness and shallowness, or from Eliot's indictment of Bertha as a
bad surrogate. These are all not only self-referential but self-serving,
self-confirming relationships; as Latimer puts it, they are relations that
make people "feel wise and virtuous-conquerors over the temptations they define in well-selected predicates." To use the words of the
Middlemarch narrator, they are a taking of the world as an udder to
feed the supreme self.33 In Middlemarch, Eliot equates our feeding
on the external world with infantilism and moral stupidity. The danger
she allows herself to dramatize in The Lifted Veil is that we can never
outgrow this infantile, narcissistic relation to what is outside of us by
a transition from immature egotism to mature sympathy. The collapse
in The Lifted Veil of any tenable distinction between sympathy and
egotism is an indictment of sympathy as implicitly narcissistic. Eliot
is not only asking whether sympathy is possible without narcissism,
without seeing the other in terms of its "great relation of a common
nature" to oneself. She is suggesting that compassion and sympathy
are disguised forms of narcissism and, as such, not fundamentally
different from the kinds of character-traits (selfishness, misanthropy)
she and her narrators routinely indict.34
The Lifted Veil suggests Eliot's awareness of this ethical dilemma
in the problematic figure of Bertha, the privileged object of the text's
epistemological, moral, and sexual energies. It is this figure, I have
been arguing, which implies a true threat to Eliot.35 The threat is not
Bertha's ultimate revelation as afemmefatale, nor is it her role as Eliot's
bad surrogate. Those threats can be (and are) visually exposed and
then symbolically expelled from the text, so they pose no real danger.
The Fatal Woman is unveiled as such and then exiled, while the bad

surrogate is replaced by the good surrogate, Latimer. Insofar as they
are recoverable threats, they in fact play an apotropaic role, much like
Freud's fetish which acknowledges but also protects against the threat

of potential castration. The revelation of Bertha as the bad surrogate,
for instance, allows Latimer to be realized more fully as Eliot's good
Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

455

surrogate, thereby helping to redeem Eliot's ethics of sympathy. At the
same time, however, Eliot's injunction to face the other as other implies

that there is something unethical and narcissistic in the revealing of
Bertha as Latimer's and Eliot's bad double. This implication hints at a
second ethical threat in The Lifted Veil, one that is only partially veiled
by the more visible threat of Bertha's antipathy. This latter threat takes
the form not of antipathy but of sympathy, of a relation to the other

that is fundamentally metaphorical (and therefore unethical insofar
as it is not telepathic).36
Bertha is the face of both aspects of Eliot's ethical project and ethi-

cal dilemma. She is the text's exemplary figure for otherness and for
the awareness of otherness: "[S]he made the only exception, among all
human beings about me, to my unhappy gift of insight. About Bertha

I was always in a state of uncertainty" (V, 15). At various points in
the novella, Latimer compares Bertha to a piece of writing, often a
piece of writing he cannot read or comprehend, in order to designate
her inaccessibility. The illegible or incomprehensible writing to which
Bertha is compared is a metaphor for the other's irreducible otherness,

just as Latimer's telepathy is a metaphor for the appreciation of that
otherness as such. At the same time, Latimer also compares Bertha
to a visual object, in order to designate her accessibility ("I saw all
around the narrow room of this woman's soul"). Here the other's accessibility is figured in terms of visibility, and telepathy is figured in

sensory terms, as clairvoyance. In light of the traditional Aristotelian
association between perception and the use of metaphor, Latimer's
visions of Bertha are figures for a relation to the other that is based
on metaphorical principles of similarity and analogy. The complementary figures of Bertha as visual object and of Latimer's clairvoyance
are self-reflexive metaphors for how the other becomes intelligible
through one's own metaphors for it. They are indicative of how the
other becomes intelligible to us through its (visual) similarity and
dissimilarity to ourselves. In The Lifted Veil, Latimer tellingly gains
clairvoyant access to Bertha's mind at the moment when he looks at her
in terms of himself, or, more specifically, in terms of her dissimilarity
to himself. He contrasts her antipathy for him with his own sympathy
for his dying father, thereby converting her into his bad double. At
that moment, he also tellingly stops thinking of her as radically other
to himself, as an oriental alphabet he cannot read or decipher. The
revelation of Bertha by means of sight (that is, by means of metaphor)
enables the (moral) closure of the narrative but only partially veils that
which is left out by this closure: the other's otherness, the otherness

456 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

for which the oriental alphabet is a metaphor or, more precisely, a
catachresis. Eliot's dilemma in the novella (and perhaps in her novels
and criticism more generally) is that her sympathetic ethics succeeds
only at the expense of a telepathic relation, at the expense of what she

considers our obligatory "reverence before the secrets of each other's
souls" (L, 3:164).

Tulane University
NOTES

The intellectual debt my article owes to the teachings and writings of J. Hillis M

will be apparent, and I am very grateful for his longstanding generosity and guida

I also want to thank Megan Becker-Leckrone, Ellen Burt, Matthew Potolsky

Barbara Spackman for their responses to the dissertation chapter on which this
is partially based. Thanks as well to Stefan Mattessich, Marc Redfield, and to Ken

Reinhard and the U.C.L.A. 1998-1999 Humanities Consortium Seminar Series.

deepest thanks go to Patience Moll for her careful reading and substantive, thou
ful suggestions.
1 George Eliot, Essays of George Eliot, ed. Thomas Pinney (New York: Colum
Univ. Press, 1963), 270-71. The figure of an expanded sympathy is indebted to W
sworth: "Thus daily were my sympathies enlarged." See The Prelude: 1799, 1805, 18
ed. Jonathan Wordsworth and others (New York: Norton, 1979), 74.

2 Walter Pater, The Renaissance: Studies in Art and Poetry, ed. Donald L.

(Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1980), xix-xx. On the relation between aesth
and sympathy, see in particular chapter 17 of Adam Bede: "All honour and rever
to the divine beauty of form ... But let us love that other beauty too, which lies in
secret of proportion, but in the secret of deep human sympathy." Eliot, Adam B
ed. Stephen Gill (New York: Penguin, 1980), 224. On the ethics of sympathy in A
Bede, see J. Hillis Miller, The Ethics of Reading: Kant, de Man, Eliot, Trollope, Jam

and Benjamin (New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1987), 61-80.

3 See Kate Flint, "Blood, Bodies, and The Lifted Veil," Nineteenth-Century Literat

51 (1997): 455-73; Malcolm Bull, "Mastery and Slavery in The Lifted Veil," Es
in Criticism 48 (1998): 244-61; Richard Menke, "Fiction as Vivisection: G. H. L

and George Eliot," ELH 67 (2000): 629-30; and Sally Shuttleworth, "Introduction

Eliot, The Lifted Veil and Brother Jacob, ed. Shuttleworth (New York: Penguin, 200

xi-xxxii. Much of this line of inquiry is indebted to B. M. Gray, "Pseudoscience
George Eliot's 'The Lifted Veil,"' Nineteenth-Century Fiction 36 (1982): 407-23.
4 Eliot, The Lifted Veil and Brother Jacob, ed. Helen Small (Oxford: Oxford Un
Press, 1999), 15. Hereafter abbreviated V and cited parenthetically by page num
page numbers for Small's introduction provided parenthetically in roman numer
5 The Lifted Veil was originally published anonymously in Blackwood's magazin
July 1859, six months after the publication of Adam Bede. Its composition coin
with Eliot's beginning work on what would eventually become The Mill on the F
Eliot did not republish the novella until 1878, two years before her death. On t
biographical circumstances of the text's composition and publication, see Go
Haight, George Eliot: A Biography (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1968), 295-97;
U. C. Knoepflmacher, George Eliot's Early Novels: The Limits of Realism (Berke
Univ. of California Press, 1968), 128-39.

Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

457

6 Charles Swann, "Djai Vu: Djai Lu: 'The Lifted Veil' as an Experiment in Art,"
Literature and History 5 (1979): 47.
My claims in this paragraph are based on some points in Swann's essay, especially
pages 46-49. Swann's argument about the ethical problem in The Lifted Veil is the
following:

[Latimer] has "direct experience of the inner states of others." Yet-with

all these advantages-he does not feel for others as a reader should...
Latimer is in literal possession of what Eliot normally offers as metaphors
for how to be a moral agent: but he is paralyzed into passivity by his insights.

If Latimer is an example of a reader trapped in the book of life, then there
is the horrific possibility for Eliot that her key value of sympathy doesn't
open the door into the fully moral life. Her theories about the relationship
between her art and life may be entirely wrong. (47)
While Swann here identifies Latimer as Eliot's reader, other critics and Swann himself

have also interpreted him as a stand-in for Eliot herself or for the novelist as such.
See Gillian Beer, "Myth and the Single Consciousness: Middlemarch and The Lifted
Veil," in This Particular Web: Essays on Middlemarch, ed. Ian Adam (Toronto: Univ.
of Toronto Press, 1975), 94-101; Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar, The Madwoman in
the Attic: The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-Century Literary Imagination (New

Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1979), 470-71; Neil Hertz, George Eliot's Pulse (Stanford:
Stanford Univ. Press, 2003), 42-62; and Swann, 46-49. These critics equate Latimer's
telepathy with the novelist's power to imagine the thoughts and feelings of a great variety of different characters. Whether Latimer is interpreted as the reader, the writer,

or both at once, he points to a similar ethical problem: a lack of sympathy for those
to whose thoughts and feelings he has access. His responses to his clairvoyant visions
contradict Eliot's moral injunctions about creating and responding to art.
8 Eliot, The George Eliot Letters, ed. Haight, 9 vols. (New Haven: Yale Univ. Press,
1954-1978), 9:220. Hereafter abbreviated L and cited parenthetically by volume and
page number.
9 My claims about the novella's negative implications for Eliot's aesthetics and ethics
are complementary to a critical tradition that has read The Lifted Veil as an allegorical
text about writing and the creative process. See, for example, Ruby Redinger, George
Eliot: The Emergent Self(New York: Knopf, 1975), 403; Knoepflmacher, 137-61; Hertz,

Pulse, 42-62; Swann, 42; Beer, 94-101; and Gilbert and Gubar, 470. See also Carroll

Vierra, "'The Lifted Veil' and George Eliot's Early Aesthetic," Studies in English Literature 24 (1984): 749-67. Vierra reads the novella in the context of Marian Evans's
critical writings about art and aesthetics from the 1840s and 1850s. Many critics locate
the allegory at the level of an autobiographical identification they find between the
emerging writer George Eliot and her protagonist Latimer, who identifies himself as
a failed poet. Both the young Marian Evans and Latimer, they maintain, are characterized by intense self-doubt, self-consciousness, insecurity, feelings of guilt vis-a-vis
their fathers and families, and "feminine" sensitivity. See, for example, Knoepflmacher,

137, 150-52, 160-61; Redinger, 401-5; and Gilbert and Gubar, 450. Other critics focus
specifically on the problem of Latimer's misanthropy and selfishness but do not discuss
these character traits in terms of their potentially negative implications for Eliot's ethics
of sympathy. See Eliot L. Rubinstein, "A Forgotten Tale by George Eliot," Nineteenth-

Century Fiction 17 (1962): 180-82; Edward Hurley, "'The Lifted Veil': George Eliot
as Anti-Intellectual," Studies in Short Fiction 5 (1968): 260-62; and Knoepflmacher,
154-59. It is only a few critics, in particular Swann and Beer, who have brought the

458 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

theme of Latimer's misanthropy into a relation with Eliot's allegorical reflections in
The Lifted Veil on art and writing as such.
10 Latimer's conversion to sympathy anticipates that of Philip Wakem in The Mill on
the Floss, a text written concurrently with and after The Lifted Veil. There are notable
parallels between the two characters, as both are insecure, solipsistic, deeply alienated
from society, selfish, and devoid of sympathy for others. Philip indicates his conversion
in a letter he writes to Maggie late in the novel:
The new life I have found in caring for your joy and sorrow more than
for what is directly my own, has transformed the spirit of rebellious murmuring into that willing endurance which is the birth of true sympathy.
I think nothing but such complete and intense love could have initiated
me into that enlarged life which grows and grows by appropriating the life
of others; for before I was always dragged back from it by ever-present
painful self-consciousness.
Eliot, The Mill on the Floss, ed. A. S. Byatt (New York: Penguin, 1979), 634.
" The doubling is emphasized in the two characters' reciprocal gazes, and even at
the level of the sentence: "we were front to front with each other and judged each
other" (my emphasis). The mirroring between Bertha and Latimer has gone largely
unnoticed by critics. This oversight works in the interest of Eliot's ethical agenda, since
ultimately Eliot wants to disassociate the two characters in order to redeem Latimer
and to indict Bertha. Only Hertz has recognized Bertha as Latimer's clone (see Hertz,
Pulse, 55-56, 62). For Hertz, the doubling of Eliot's surrogate, Latimer, is a step towards
safely distancing Eliot (and, by extension, Marian Evans) from any direct implication
in the potentially harmful powers of her own language. Gilbert and Gubar also note
that Bertha and Latimer are "mutually reciprocal characters." They interpret the "effeminate Latimer" and the "castrating Bertha" autobiographically, as two aspects of
Eliot's allegedly divided self. See The Madwoman in the Attic, 465.
12 Consider, for example, Freud's statements on women and ethics. In his essay

"Some Psychical Consequences of the Anatomical Distinction between the Sexes,"
Freud writes, "I cannot evade the notion (though I hesitate to give it expression) that
for women the level of what is ethically normal is different from what it is in men"
(The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, ed. and
trans. James Strachey and others, 24 vols. [London: The Hogarth Press, 1953-1974],
19:257). In the lecture on "Femininity," he makes this point in a less roundabout way:
"[W]e attribute a larger amount of narcissism to femininity" (22:132). On Bertha as a
version of the conventional nineteenth-century Fatal Woman figure, see Knoepflmacher

(148-49), Gilbert and Gubar (459-61), and Vierra (755).

13 Hertz, The End of the Line: Essays on Psychoanalysis and the Sublime (New York:

Columbia Univ. Press, 1985), 224.
14 Hertz, End of the Line, 85.

15 J. Hillis Miller, "Optic and Semiotic in Middlemarch," in George Eliot: Modern
Critical Views, ed. Harold Bloom (New York: Chelsea House, 1986), 102.
" The citation is from chapter fifteen of Middlemarch. The full sentence, which refers

to Lydgate, runs as follows: "For surely all must admit that a man may be puffed and

belauded, envied, ridiculed, counted upon as a tool and fallen in love with, or at least
selected as a future husband, and yet remain virtually unknown-known merely as a
cluster of signs for his neighbour's false suppositions" (Eliot, Middlemarch, ed. W. J.
Harvey [New York: Penguin, 1985], 171). I am arguing that The Lifted Veil explicitly
depicts Bertha as such a cluster of signs and Latimer's unveiling of her as one inter-

Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

459

pretation of those signs. For a discussion of the characters in Middlemarch as texts
open to numerous and potentially conflicting interpretations by other characters, see
J. Hillis Miller, "Narrative and History," ELH 41 (1974): 465-68.
17 J. Hillis Miller makes a similar argument about perceptions in Middlemarch. He
proposes that the optical metaphors in the novel, and the kinds of knowledge they make
possible, are always subverted by other metaphors that qualify any (literal or figurative)
perceptions as interpretations, which is to say as having a subjective investment in what

is seen and in particular ways of seeing. See Miller, "Optic and Semiotic," 109.
" The parenthetical citation is from The Lifted Veil, 41.
19 According to George Henry Lewes's journal, Marian Evans and he attended a
performance of Donizetti's opera Lucrezia Borgia in August 1857, not long before the
writing of The Lifted Veil. See Haight, 241. In her notes for The Lifted Veil, Helen
Small points out that the painting Latimer describes was for much of the nineteenth
century attributed to Giorgione in error, and identifies it as a copy of Lorenzo Lotto's

A Lady with a Drawing of Lucretia.
20 Terry Eagleton, "Power and Knowledge in 'The Lifted Veil,'" Literature and
History 9 (1983): 58-59. Eagleton maintains that the revelation scene in The Lifted
Veil provides the reader with no means by which to verify its truth, but he lays out
the predicament very differently than I do. On the one hand, he argues, the conventions of realist fictions demand that Latimer's report be taken literally because he is
the narrator and as such the most reliable index of truth in the novella. On the other

hand, he maintains, it is equally possible that "Latimer has rigged his tale to frame
his wife, impudently concocting an event as he may have previously, perhaps more
permissably, falsified perceptions" (58). For Eagleton, this ambiguity undermines the
implicit restoration of truth provided by narrative, a restoration that is generically
the aim of realist fiction as such. My own reading of the scene does not attribute its
ambiguity to character or intention (Latimer's alleged untrustworthiness) but rather
to the truth that is revealed.

21 Aristotle, Rhetoric, trans. Rhys Roberts, in The Rhetoric and Poetics of Aristotle,
ed. Edward P. J. Corbett (New York: Modern Library, 1984), 1405a 170. Eliot famously
makes reference to Aristotle's theory of metaphor in book two, chapter one of The

Mill on the Floss.

22 Eliot, Essays, 270. In that same essay, she writes that art is a mode of "extending
our contact with our fellow-men beyond the bounds of our personal lot" (Essays, 271,
my emphasis).
23 Eliot, Middlemarch, 196, my emphasis.
24 This is true even for critics who do not endorse Eliot's ethics of sympathy and focus,

rather, on her questioning of the possibility or viability of sympathetic identifications, as

for instance John Kucich in Repression in Victorian Fiction: Charlotte Bronti, George
Eliot, and Charles Dickens (Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1987), J. Hillis Miller
in The Ethics of Reading, or D. A. Miller in Narrative and Its Discontents: Problems
of Closure in the Traditional Novel (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1981).
25 Ludwig Feuerbach, The Essence of Christianity, trans. Eliot (New York: Harper,
1957), 268.
26 On the other in Middlemarch and in Eliot's work in general as an epistemological

problem, see J. Hillis Miller, Others (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 2001), 67-79.
27 In the crucial revivification scene, Latimer writes, "[W]e all felt that the dark veil
had completely fallen" (V, 41). This remark is thoroughly ambiguous since it designates

Bertha's complete obfuscation as much as her full exposure.

460 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

28 The ethics of sympathy is evoked explicitly by the epigraph Eliot wrote for The

Lifted Veil fourteen years after its original publication: "Give me no light, great
heaven, but such as turns / To energy of human fellowship; / No powers save the
growing heritage / That makes completer manhood" (Letters, 5:380). This epigraph
first appears in a letter of February 1873 to her editor, John Blackwood. It has been
attached to all subsequently published versions of the novella, including the one in
the 1878 Cabinet edition of Eliot's works. Ostensibly, the epigraph serves to counter
the threat of Latimer's lack of sympathy, as Small has argued in her introduction to
the novella: "[The motto] is also an attempt to close down the threat of what [Eliot]
has allowed herself to imagine. ... [It] courts our compassionate insight into the narrator while he himself mocks us with the impossibility of sympathy" (xxx). I would add

that Eliot's evocation of human fellowship also covers over (and defends against) the
impossibility of telepathy.

29 On the success and failure of telepathy in The Lifted Veil, see Marc Redfield,
Phantom Formations: Aesthetic Ideology and the Bildungsroman (Ithaca: Cornell Univ.
Press, 1996), 160-70. Complementary to my juxtaposition of sympathy and telepathy,
Redfield reads the figure of telepathy as itself indicative of both identification and difference. He discusses telepathy as a metaphor for reading the materiality of language,
and, at the same time, as "a particularly appropriate metaphor for an aesthetic of
sympathy, grounded in a predicament of reading it must disavow" (162). So on the one
hand, he equates the distance (tele) in telepathy with the other's irreducible difference
as the otherness of language: "[T]his difference and distance is that of language in its
materiality" (162). At the same time, he takes the pathos in telepathy as a figure for
feeling, for sympathy, for aesthetically bringing the other close to oneself. These two
figures are for him in a relation of mutual disavowal, wherein feeling must disavow
the necessity of reading in order to succeed. Telepathy (as a figure for feeling with the
other) figuratively designates the possibility of sympathy, but (as a figure for reading
the material signs of language) it also designates sympathy's destruction. It insists that
one cannot feel with the other, one only reads the material signs that constitute the
other's otherness from oneself. Telepathy thus designates an irreducible difference
within sympathy that is also the ground of sympathy. For Eliot, I would add, the
other's otherness from oneself designates not only the epistemological destruction
of any grounds on which sympathy could take place but also an ethical imperative
that is heterogeneous to the ethical imperative called sympathy. Certainly the other's
otherness is for Eliot a metaphor for the materiality of language, as Redfield points
out; but this figurative relationship also functions in reverse, thereby supplementing
the epistemological problematic with an ethical one.
30 Insofar as this move to sympathy is at best a consolation, however, it also relegates

sympathy to a questionable status. As D. A. Miller has argued, Eliot's ostensible endorsement of an ethics of sympathy coincides with an implicit questioning of sympathy.

See Narrative and Its Discontents, 152-94. For Miller's reading of Eliot, sympathy
is on the one hand a genuinely ethical transcendence of egotism, of the separation
between self and other, and of the ambiguous material signs through which the other

becomes intelligible. At the same time, Miller argues, sympathy is shown by Eliot
to be impossible, insofar as any moment of transcendence is subverted by the very
material signs that narrate it, signs which are demonstratively as much indicative of
egotism and obfuscation as of fellow feeling and transparency. Hence Eliot leaves us
in a kind of double bind: sympathetic transcendence would negate the problem of
interpersonal differences, but it is in turn negated by difference (in the form of mate-

Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

461

rial signs). Miller's reading of sympathy as a structure of mutual negation is not unlike
the structure of mutual disavowal identified in Redfield's double reading of telepathy,

discussed in the previous endnote. Both Redfield and Miller see the materiality of
signs as a difference Eliot would overcome in the name of a sympathetic ethics. In
The Lifted Veil, however, the association of Bertha with texts, writing, and signs not
only questions and potentially subverts the possibility of sympathetic identifications.
It is also a reminder of an entirely different ethical imperative, of an ethics that would
not transcend otherness but maintain it (this relation is what I am calling telepathy).
My emphasis on telepathy as a second ethical imperative (besides sympathy) refutes
received ideas about the formal impasse in which deconstructive readings of Eliot
are often said to terminate. Telepathy is for Eliot a figure for a genuine ethical value,
not only a figure for the simultaneous possibility and impossibility of interpersonal
identifications.

3' This phrase is excerpted from a telling remark about The Lifted Veil made by
Lewes to the writer Edith Simcox, a remark that also serves as the epigraph for this
section of the essay: "the moral is plain enough ... the one-sided knowing of things in
relation to the self" (Eliot, Letters, 9:220). Lewes is presumably referring to Latimer's
egotism, but Latimer's sympathy, and perhaps any sympathy, is similarly unilateral,
similarly one-sided.
32 As Kucich has pointed out, egotism in Eliot's work is not an indifference to or an
isolation from other people. Rather, it is a dependence on others. For Kucich, Eliot's
egotists (such a Tito in Romola, Hetty in Adam Bede, Godfrey in Silas Marner, and
Gwendolen and Grandcourt in Daniel Deronda) depend on the thoughts and opinions
of the people around them to constitute themselves as selves, to have desires and motives, and to feel valuable (181-200).
33 "We are all of us born in moral stupidity, taking the world as an udder to feed our

supreme selves" (Eliot, Middlemarch, 243).
34 It is on this point that my reading dovetails momentarily with Kucich's compelling

and counterintuitive critique of sympathy as a moral value in Eliot's work (114-200).
Kucich too finds an unexpected and ironic similarity between sympathy and egotism
in Eliot's writings; both sympathy and egotism, he claims, are for Eliot fundamentally
similar kinds of relationships to other people. Both relationships represent a dangerous
dependence on, and vulnerability to, other people, and both represent an implicit submission of the self to the other (172, 181). As such, Kucich argues, both pose a threat
to the autonomy of the self (150). I would argue, by contrast, that neither sympathy
nor egotism poses a threat to the self (what they threaten, rather, is Eliot's ethics). Both
are fundamentally confirming and constitutive of the self, insofar as both are relations
to the other in which the other is defined in terms of the self (and not vice versa, as
Kucich would say), and in which the self constructs itself out of an appropriation of the

other. According to Kucich, Eliot's solution to the problem of otherness is to bypass
any relation to the other altogether, and to advocate a model of selfhood and an ethics
that are constituted by an exclusively inner dialectic between desire and internalized
repression (117). On the contrary, I do not see Eliot advocating a turn inward and away
from the other but rather advocating a qualitatively different relationship to the other,

one I am calling telepathy (as an alternative to both egotism and sympathy). It seems
to me significant that Kucich's critique of sympathy, a value which he understands as a
fusion with the other and as a renunciation of all individuation, does not acknowledge
Eliot's insistence on respecting and simultaneously engaging with the other's otherness.
Kucich cites part of a sentence from "The Natural History of German Life" about the

462 Sympathy and Telepathy in The Lifted Veil

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

obligatory movement from selfishness to moral sentiment, but tellingly elides Eliot's
call in that sentence for an "attention to what is apart from [ourselves]" (see Kucich,
114, and Eliot, Essays, 270).
35 To read Eliot's text and then to talk about Eliot being somehow threatened is to
reproduce the move from telepathy to sympathy that is performed within the text itself.

Just as there is a movement in the novella from "reading" the other to "seeing into" or
"feeling with" the other, we perform, as soon as we talk about Eliot's awareness of a
threat, a movement from reading the text to psychologizing and anthropomorphizing
it. John Blackwell, for instance, writes to Eliot about the manuscript version, "Others
like me are thrilled [with the story], but wish the author in a happier frame of mind,"
and elsewhere, "I think you must have been worrying and disturbing yourself about

something when you wrote" (Eliot, Letters, 3:112, 67). Blackwell's attention moves
from the writing to a speculation about how the author must have been feeling when

she wrote. This interest in Marian Evans's mindset is the move from reading the
manuscript to psychologizing it. The moment we ask about how Eliot might have
been feeling, and the moment we attempt to explain her awareness of a given threat,
we are operating at the level of similarity, of metaphor, of aesthetic ideology. We are
reproducing an ethics of sympathy, not an ethics of telepathy. As Eliot suggests, this
move is epistemologically unavoidable, but it also places us in an ethical predicament
similar to the one dramatized in her text.
I Eliot's suspicion of sympathy, and her shifting of the ethical dilemma away from

an opposition between sympathy and egotism, distinguish her project from ethical
theories that equate morality with individual conscience, intention, or character psychology. Those theories often base their definition of ethics on psychology, typology,
the traditional subject, or the categorical valorization of some form of alterity. They
also tend to construct simple oppositions between good and bad, moral and immoral,
self and other. Eliot's own conclusions demonstrate how such projects can succeed
ethically only through celebrations and condemnations of the other (and of the self)
that are ultimately arbitrary and, in a manner of speaking, narcissistic.

Thomas

Albrecht

This content downloaded from
128.59.222.107 on Mon, 06 Jun 2022 16:03:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

463

